Josfaj/plt 787 new tutorial (#4977)
input-output-hk/plutus: doc/read-the-docs-site/tutorials/english-auction-example.rst

Plutus Tx is not a new language, but rather a subset of Haskell, and it is compiled into Plutus Core, a low level language based on higher-order polymorphic lambda calculus.
Plutus Core is the code that runs on-chain, i.e., by every node validating the transaction, using an interpreter known as the CEK machine.
A Plutus Core program included in a Cardano transaction is often referred to as Plutus script or Plutus validator.

To develop and deploy a smart contract, you'd also need off-chain code for building and submitting transactions, querying for available UTXOs and so on.
You may also want a frontend for your smart contract for better user experiences.
The frontend and backend of the off-chain part of smart contracts are not covered in this page.

Before we get to the Plutus Tx code, let's briefly go over some basic concepts, including UTXO, datum, redeemer and script context.

The EUTXO Model, Datum, Redeemer and Script Context
--------------------------------

UTXO (unspent transaction output) is the ledger model used by some blockchains, including bitcoin.
A UTXO is produced by a transaction, is immutable, and can only be spent once by another transaction.

> In the classic UTXO model, a UTXO contains a wallet address and a value (e.g., some amount of Ada and/or other tokens), and is identified by the wallet address.

Reviewer: I know that we use a lot the term "classic UTXO model", but I wonder if the term "original utxo model" is perhaps a better ift. For example we could say before in line 26:

UTXO (unspent transaction output) is the ledger model used by some blockchains, and was originally introduced in bitcoin.

Then we can refer it here as "the original utxo model". Otherwise the reader does not know what the "classic utxo model" refers to

Reviewer: `and is identified by the wallet address.` is ambiguous. I don't know how much level of information you want to give to the user but you could say

```
In the original UTXO model, a UTXO contains a wallet address and a value (e.g., some amount of Ada and/or other tokens). Inside a transaction, a UTXO is uniquely identified by the wallet address. At the global blockchain level (a chain of blocks of transactions), the UTXO can be uniquely identified by the transaction id and wallet address.
```
You may leave out the "global blockchain level" sentence because then you have to explain what a transaction id is!

Reviewer: Actually what I am saying above is not fully correct, I think you need an extra transaction index, both at the local level and the global level, right?

Author: I incorporated your comment but didn't include the sentence about "global blockchain level".

It can be spent by a transaction, if the transaction is signed by the private key of the wallet address.

> The EUTXO (Extended UTXO) model introduces a new kind of UTXO: script UTXO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The EUTXO (Extended UTXO) model extends the original model with a new kind of UTXO: a script UTXO.
```

A script UTXO contains a value, a script (usually a Plutus script) and a piece of data called *datum*, and is identified by the hash of the script.
For a transaction to spend it, the transaction must provide a piece of input data to the script, referred to as the *redeemer*.
The script is then run, and it must succeed in order for the transaction to be allowed to spend the UTXO.
Besides the redeemer, the script also has access to the datum contained in the UTXO, as well as the details of the transaction trying to spend it (referred to as *script context*).

Note that the only thing a Plutus script does is to determine whether a transaction can spend the script UTXO that contains the script. It is *not* responsible for such things as deciding whether it can spend a different UTXO, checking that the input value in a transaction equals the output value, or updating the state of the smart contract.

> Consider it a pure function that returns ``Bool``.

Reviewer: what does `checking that the input value in a transaction equals the output value` exactly mean? 

I thought it was possible that a script can do that for the current transaction, but *cannot* do that for any other transaction?

Author: I'll need to confirm the answer to this question @bezirg . Maybe I'll ask the question on plutus-core-dev channel.

Checking transaction validity is done by the ledger rules, and updating the state of a smart contract is done by constructing the transaction to produce a new script UTXO with an updated datum.

The immutability of UTXOs leads to the extremely useful property of completely predictable transaction fees.
The Plutus script in a transaction can be run off-chain to determine the fee before submitting the transaction onto the blockchain.
When the transaction is submitted, if some UTXOs it tries to spend has already been spent, the transaction is immediately rejected without penalty.
If all input UTXOs still exist, and the Plutus script is invoked, the on-chain behavior would be exactly identical to the off-chain behavior.

> This cannot be achieved if transaction inputs are mutable (e.g., in Ethereum's account-based model).

Reviewer: Perhaps using past tense is better here?

```This could not be achieved if transaction inputs were mutable (e.g., using Ethereum's account-based model).```

``contains`` takes two time intervals, and checks that the first interval completely includes the second.
Since the transaction may be validated at any point in the ``txInfoValidRange`` interval, we need to check that the entire interval lies within ``(-∞, apEndTime params]``.

The reason we need the ``txInfoValidRange`` interval, instead of using the exact time the transaction is validated, is due to `determinism <https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2021/09/06/no-surprises-transaction-validation-on-cardano/>`_.
Using the exact time would be like calling a ``getCurrentTime`` function and branching based on the current time.
On the other hand, by using the ``txInfoValidRange`` interval, the same interval is always used by the same transaction.

The ``refundsPreviousHighestBid`` condition checks that the transaction pays the previous highest bid to the previous bidder:

.. literalinclude:: AuctionValidator.hs
   :start-after: BLOCK5
   :end-before: BLOCK6

It uses ``PlutusTx.find`` to find the transaction output (a UTXO) that pays to the previous bidder the amount equivalent to the previous highest bid, and verifies that there is at least one such output.

> ``singleton adaSymbol adaToken amt`` constructs a ``Value`` with ``amt`` Lovelaces.

Reviewer: suggestion: `Lovelaces ( the subunit of Ada currency)`

.. highlight:: haskell
.. _english_auction_tutorial:

Plutus Script for a Simple Auction Smart Contract
==========================================================

Overview
------------

This tutorial describes the general logic, structure, and Plutus Tx code needed for designing and writing a Plutus smart contract that can be used for an English auction that is executed on the Cardano blockchain.

Key aspects of this example are the EUTXO model, the concepts involved in designing the EUTXOs, the actions required of the parties involved with the auction transactions, and Plutus on-chain code examples.
The specific on-chain code examples included here are accompanied by detailed explanations of what the Haskell code is doing.

> The EUTXO model

Author: I like your suggestion. I'll update this with more specific references.

> The EUTXO model

Author: Ziyang has added some nice descriptions of the concepts of contract parameters, datum, redeemer, and script context.

> The EUTXO model

Reviewer 2: Just for consideration, this entry covers the definitions of a datum, a redeemer, and context and also explains what context can include: https://docs.cardano.org/plutus/plutus-scripts

> The EUTXO model

Reviewer 2: Joseph, please also consider linking to the EUTXO handbook: https://ucarecdn.com/3da33f2f-73ac-4c9b-844b-f215dcce0628/EUTXOhandbook_for_EC.pdf

Rather than having an address that corresponds to a public key that can be verified by a signature that is added to the transaction, we have more general addresses that are not based on public keys or the hashes of public keys.
Instead, the addresses contain arbitrary logic which decides under which conditions a particular EUTXO can be spent by a particular transaction.

Further reading on Cardano's EUTXO model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* `Architecting DApps on the EUTXO ledger <https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2021/11/16/architecting-dapps-on-the-eutxo-ledger/>`_
* `The EUTXO Handbook <https://www.essentialcardano.io/article/the-eutxo-handbook>`_
* `Concurrency and all that: Cardano smart contracts and the EUTXO model <https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2021/09/10/concurrency-and-all-that-cardano-smart-contracts-and-the-eutxo-model/>`_
* Cardano's Extended UTXO accounting model---built to support multi-assets and smart contracts:

   * `Part 1 <https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2021/03/11/cardanos-extended-utxo-accounting-model/>`_
   * `Part 2 <https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2021/03/12/cardanos-extended-utxo-accounting-model-part-2/>`_

> Conceptualizing the English auction in the EUTXO framework

Reviewer 3: Er, probably make the sequence diagram correspond to the worked example later, of course.

> Conceptualizing the English auction in the EUTXO framework

Reviewer 3: I think I just disagree. We're giving people a lot of new concepts here, we want them to be _really clear_ on what it is we're implementing. If they're at all uncertain about how the auction is meant to work then they're going to have a lot more trouble interpreting the following sections.

> Conceptualizing the English auction in the EUTXO framework

Author: I'm preferring to create diagrams that use larger text and can include manually created lines and boxes. My goal is for the diagrams to be easier/simpler to follow. Although the first versions of the diagrams I'm including in the next draft may have too many words!

> Conceptualizing the English auction in the EUTXO framework

Reviewer 3: Fair enough. I like maintainability and not having to check in images, but up to you. Also sequence diagrams are a well-understood kind of diagram.

-------------------------------------------------------------

On the Cardano blockchain, a transaction contains an arbitrary number of inputs and an arbitrary number of outputs.
The effect of a transaction is to consume inputs and produce new outputs.

> In this English auction example, the item owner, Alice, wants to auction an NFT (Non-fungible token), a native token on Cardano that exists only once.

Author: Good question. I had to look it up myself. There are very many types of auctions, but the "English auction" is what I'm most familiar with. It's basically an open public auction where the current high bid is known by all the bidders, and the bidding starts low and gets higher until the auctioneer says the time is up. We may be able to just call this a common public auction and leave it at that.

An NFT can represent a piece of digital art or possibly a real-world asset.

> The general logic of the auction takes into account the following parameters:

Author: It is intended to be pretty straight forward. I'll try to simplify/make it more clear. Maybe removing the word "general" would help. I'll review.

* the owner of the token,
* the token itself,
* a minimal bid,
* a higher bid, and
* a deadline.

> At the outset, Alice creates a transaction for the English auction that has a EUTXO at the script output.

Author: Good catch!

The value of the EUTXO is the NFT, and the datum initially is nothing.
Later it will be the highest bidder and the highest bid. But at this stage, a bid has not yet taken place.

>    *On the Cardano blockchain you can’t have a EUTXO that contains only native tokens. A EUTXO always has to be accompanied by some Ada, but for the sake of simplicity we will temporarily ignore that requirement for now.*

Reviewer 3: You already use one below! I guess just you might want to use one here, then.

Bidder transactions
----------------------

In this example, Bob, the first bidder, wants to bid 100 Ada for Alice's NFT.
In order to do this, Bob creates a transaction that has two inputs and one output.

The two inputs are:

* the auction EUTXO

> * Bob's bid of 100 Ada

Author: Now that you mention it, I wonder if it is a good idea or not to ignore the fee requirement.

Datum
~~~~~~~~~

The output is at the output script, but now the value and the datum have changed.
Previously the datum was nothing but now it has the value of: (Bob, 100).

Now there is not only the NFT in the EUTXO, but also the 100 Ada bid.

> +----------------------+-------------------+

Author: I was experimenting with the small tables to see if they would be an effective way to present the info. But I don't think they are terribly useful here.

> +----------------------+-------------------+

Author: We're opting to not use these tables and instead I've inserted 3 diagrams.

| 1st bid inputs       | 1st bid outputs   |
+======================+===================+
| The auction EUTXO    | Bob               |
+----------------------+-------------------+
| Bob's bid of 100 Ada | 100 Ada           |
+----------------------+-------------------+

Redeemer
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> As a redeemer, in order to unlock the original auction EUTXO, we use something called `Bid`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a redeemer, in order to unlock the original auction EUTXO, we use a value of the `Bid` type, which contains the information about who is bidding and how much they are bidding.
```

> This is an algebraic data type. There will be other values as well.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what you're trying to convey here tbh?

The auction script will check that all the conditions are satisfied.
In this example, the script has to check these three conditions:

1. The bid happens before the deadline.
2. The bid is high enough.
3. The correct inputs and outputs are present (meaning that the auction is an output containing the NFT and it has the correct datum).

A second bidder
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next, a second bidder, Charlie, wants to outbid Bob. Charlie wants to bid 200 Ada.

Charlie will create another transaction, this one having two inputs and two outputs.
The two inputs are:

* the auction EUTXO
* Charlie's bid of 200 Ada

The two outputs are:

* the updated auction EUTXO
* a EUTXO that returns Bob's bid of 100 Ada

.. note::

>     To be more clear, technically, the auction EUTXO is not getting updated because nothing ever changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    To be more clear, technically, the auction UTXO is not getting updated because UTXOs are immutable - they always refer to one specific output of one specific transaction.
```

    Instead, what really happens is that the old auction EUTXO is spent and a new one is created.
    In a way this may feel like the auction EUTXO is getting updated, but that isn't truly accurate.

+--------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 2nd bid inputs           | 2nd bid outputs                         |
+==========================+=========================================+
| The auction EUTXO        | Newly created unspent transaction       |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Charlie's bid of 200 Ada | EUTXO that returns Bob's bid of 100 Ada |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------------------+

Bid redeemer logic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> This time we again use the `Bid` redeemer. The script has to check that these conditions are satisfied:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This time we again use the `Bid` redeemer containing the information about Charlie's bid. The script has to check that these conditions are satisfied:
```

That could be Alice who wants to collect the bid or it could be Charlie who wants to collect the NFT.
It can be anybody, but Alice and Charlie have an incentive to create it.

This transaction will have one input:

* the auction EUTXO, this time with the `Close` redeemer.

This transaction will have two outputs:

* One output is for the highest bidder, Charlie, who gets the NFT.
* The second output goes to Alice who gets the highest bid.

In the Close case, the script checks that these conditions are satisfied:

1. The deadline has been reached.
2. The winner gets the NFT.
3. The auction owner gets the highest bid.

When there are no bidders
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Finally, we need to consider the scenario in which nobody bids in the auction.
Alice creates the auction, but the auction receives no bids.
In this case, there must be a mechanism for Alice to retrieve her NFT.

To address this possibility, Alice creates a transaction with the `Close` redeemer.
However, because there is no bidder, the NFT doesn’t go to the highest bidder, but instead simply goes back to Alice.

The logic in this case is slightly different.
It will check that the NFT goes back to Alice.

> However, it doesn’t need to check the recipient because the transaction will be triggered by Alice and she can send the NFT wherever she wants.

Reviewer 3: In the previous sentence you said it checks that the NFT goes back to Alice, then you say it doesn't check the recipient, which contradict each other. It _could_ not check that the NFT goes to Alice _if_ it checks that Alice signed the transaction, but you didn't say that.

Diagram/graphic of how the smart contract works
--------------------------------------------------

> *Assess what sort of diagrams would be most helpful.*

Reviewer 3: I think you can just inline a pretty easy sequence diagram, see my suggestion above, and I suggest doing it right at the beginning.

> *Assess what sort of diagrams would be most helpful.*

Author: I've added three manually created diagrams to reflect first bid, second bid and closing transaction. We've located them next to where the corresponding events are being discussed. We'll need another review to assess their effectiveness!

Plutus Tx Validator Code
-----------------------------

With the on-chain code (the scripts from the EUTXO model), we have a script address in addition to public key addresses.
Outputs can sit at such a script address, and if a transaction tries to consume such an output, the script is executed.
The transaction is only valid if the script succeeds.

If a node receives a new transaction, it validates it before accepting it into its mempool and eventually into a block.
For each input of the transaction, if that input happens to be a script address, the corresponding script is executed.
If the script does not succeed, the transaction is invalid and does not get completed.

Plutus Core
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The programming language this script is expressed in is called (Untyped) Plutus Core, but you never write Plutus Core by hand.
Instead, you write Plutus Tx (a subset of Haskell) and that gets compiled down to Plutus Core.

> Eventually there may be other high-level languages such as Solidity, C or Python that can compile down to Plutus Core.

Author: Are you saying that there are alternatives to Plutus Tx for writing the code that gets compiled to Plutus Core? What are those alternatives?

> Eventually there may be other high-level languages such as Solidity, C or Python that can compile down to Plutus Core.

Reviewer 4: [Plutarch?](https://github.com/Plutonomicon/plutarch-plutus)

The task of a script is to say yes or no regarding whether a transaction can consume an output.

Next, we'll go over the Plutus Tx code for the auction validator.
The full source code can be found in `AuctionValidator.hs <https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus/blob/master/doc/read-the-docs-site/tutorials/AuctionValidator.hs>`_.

Data Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 

Reviewer 3: Or alternatively give a link to the full source?

First, let's define the following data types and instances for the validator:

.. literalinclude:: AuctionValidator.hs
   :start-after: BLOCK1
   :end-before: BLOCK2

> The purpose of ``makeLift`` and ``unstableMakeIsData`` will be explained later.

Reviewer 3: You could actually put them later in the program, then?

Reviewer 5: The only option would be to put it at the beginning of the next block, but that feels awkward and distracting.

* **Script context**.
  This type contains the information of the transaction that the validator can inspect.
  In our example, our validator verifies several conditions of the transaction; e.g., if it is a new bid, then it must be submitted before the auction's end time, the previous highest bid must be refunded to the previous bidder, etc.

  The script context type is fixed for each Plutus language version, e.g., for Plutus V2, it is ``PlutusLedgerApi.V2.Contexts.ScriptContext``.

.. note::
   When writing a Plutus validator using Plutus Tx, it is advisable to turn off Haskell's ``Prelude``.
   Usage of most functions and methods in ``Prelude`` should be replaced by their counterparts in the ``plutus-tx`` library, e.g., ``PlutusTx.Eq.==``.

Main validator function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now we are ready to introduce our main validator function.
The beginning of the function looks like the following:

.. literalinclude:: AuctionValidator.hs
   :start-after: BLOCK2
   :end-before: BLOCK3

Depending on whether this transaction is attempting to submit a new bid or request payout, the validator validates the corresponding set of conditions.

> The ``sufficientBid`` condition verifies that the bid amount is sufficient:

Reviewer 5: See https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus/pull/4977/files#r1036154887

We will then be able to launch the auction on-chain by submitting a transaction that locks the asset being auctioned at the script address with ``AuctionDatum Nothing`` as the datum.

.. note::
   It is worth noting that we must call ``PlutusTx.compile`` on the entire ``auctionUntypedValidator``, rather than applying it to ``params`` before compiling, as in ``$$(PlutusTx.compile [||auctionUntypedValidator params||])``.
   The latter won't work, because everything being compiled (inside ``[||...||]``) must be known at compile time, but ``params`` is not: it is a formal parameter.
   Instead, we compile the entire ``auctionUntypedValidator`` into UPLC, then use ``liftCode`` to lift ``params`` into a UPLC term, and apply the compiled ``auctionUntypedValidator`` to it at the UPLC level.
   To do so, we need the ``Lift`` instance for ``AuctionParams``, derived via ``PlutusTx.makeLift``.

Libraries for Writing Plutus Tx Scripts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This auction example shows a relatively low-level way of writing scripts using Plutus Tx.
In practice, you may consider using a higher-level library that abstracts away some of the details.

> For example, `plutus-apps <https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus-apps>`_ provides a state machine library and a constraint library for writing Plutus Tx.

Author: Can you suggest an example that can be used in production? I would like to be able to point to something specific if possible.

> For example, `plutus-apps <https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus-apps>`_ provides a state machine library and a constraint library for writing Plutus Tx.

Reviewer 4: For production, use can use `cardano-api`, `cardano-ledger` packages or the Contract API in plutus-apps (but not the State Machine).

The state machine auto generates Plutus on-chain code depending on the constraints used by the user. However, the on-chain code is REALLY large (with also large ExMem and ExCPU), so it won't run with mainnet's current config.

Using these libraries, writing a validator in Plutus Tx becomes a matter of defining state transactions and the corresponding constraints, e.g., the condition ``refundsPreviousHighestBid`` can simply be written as ``Constraints.mustPayToPubKey bidder (singleton adaSymbol adaToken amt)``.

Off-chain code
-----------------------

Since the main purpose of this tutorial is to introduce Plutus Tx and Plutus Core, we only walked through the on-chain code, responsible for validating transactions (in the sense of determining whether a transaction is allowed to spend an EUTXO).

> In addition to the on-chain code, one typically needs the accompanying off-chain code and services to perform tasks like building transactions, submitting transactions, deploying smart contracts, querying for available EUTXOs on the chain, etc.

Reviewer 4: I would also mention in a paragraph `cardano-api` which also provides (in a more low-level way) the capability to create, balancing and submit transactions with a local running node (with even some querying functions like getting the EUTXOs of a particular address).

Author: Thanks for this suggestion. I'd like to get a better handle on how cardano-api is used to do these sorts of things. It would be great to be able to at least broadly describe a valid process of using cardano-api to create, balance and submit a transaction. Or perhaps point to another source that may already exist that describes it.
